# Week of September 4

This assignment is due EOD on September 11, 2025.
Requirements: Task 1 AND Task 2 AND (Task 3 OR Task 4)

## Submission

As you are working, you can [commit and push](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-git/about-git) to your fork. 
To submit the assignment, you will [create a Pull Request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork) (PR) with the main [collaborative](https://github.com/ml-feedback-sys/collaborative-f25) repository.
Please title the PR "09-04 Submission - `netID`" and include a description of the work that you did.

## Task 1: English character bigrams as a Markov Chain

Copy the [script](../code/09-04bigram_markov_chain.py) from this repository into your folder in the collaborative repository (`submission/netID`).
The template file includes code for loading [English bigram frequency data](https://gist.github.com/lydell/259ab9f2ddaa1a64e6bd), constructing a transition matrix, sampling from the Markov chain, and comparing empirical and stationary distributions of characters. 
Extend the provided code to do a more thorough analysis of the relationship between empirical character frequency and the stationary distribution. 
You should consider things like generating longer sequences, generating multiple sequences, and starting from different initial characters.
Create visualizations (e.g. histograms) of your results and submit them along with a description of what you observe in your PR.


## Task 2: Markov chain convergence analysis

Recall from lecture that the state distribution evolves as $\mu_{t+1} = P^\top \mu_t$. 
Implement a function to compute the state distribution $t$ steps in the future from any arbitrary initial state distribution $\mu_0$. 
Now compare the distribution $\mu_t$ to the stationary distribution for different initial distributions and different values of $t$. 
As in the previous task, create visualizations and submit them along with a description of what you observe in your PR.
Also submit a mathematical explanation for what you observe. *Hint: you should inspect the eigenvalues of the transition matrix.*


## (pick one) Task 3: Softmax transition probabilities

Instead of generating text with the raw frequency counts, consider instead sampling according to softmax probabilities. 
This means that we replace the current probabilities $p_{ij}$ with 
$$ \frac{\exp(\beta p_{ij})}{\sum_{k=1}^n \exp(\beta p_{ik}) } $$
Repeat the analysis from Tasks 1 and 2 for softmax transitions and report the results in your PR.
What happens as $\beta\to\infty$? (I.e., we deterministically select the maximum probability character.)


## (pick one) Task 4: Alternative data source

Find an alternative source of frequency data, e.g for a different language, for words instead of characters, from a particular subset of text, for $n$-grams with $n>2$. 
You can use tools like like `nltk` package to extract frequencies from text.
Repeat the analysis from Tasks 1 and 2 for the new setting and report the results in your PR. 
Comment on observed differences. 