# Week of September 11

This assignment is due EOD on September 18, 2025.
Requirements: Task 1 AND Task 2 AND Task 3 AND (Task 4 OR Task 5).

## Submission

As you are working, you can [commit and push](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-git/about-git) to your fork. 
To submit the assignment, you will [create a Pull Request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork) (PR) with the main [collaborative](https://github.com/ml-feedback-sys/collaborative-f25) repository.
Please title the PR "09-04 Submission - `netID`" and include a description of the work that you did.

Make sure you are keeping your fork [up to date](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/syncing-a-fork).
Any files that you submit should be in your folder in the collaborative repository (`submission/netID`).


## Task 1: Plot trajectories from many initial conditions

Choose one of the dynamical system examples discussed in lecture: a linear system, inverted pendulum, gradient descent, or the nonlinear quadratic example.
Choose some parameter values and implement the dynamics function in code.
(Note that this repository contains a starter simulation notebooks.)
Investigate the behavior by plotting the state over time from many different initial conditions.
Create a visually informative plot of trajectories and include it in your PR.

## Task 2: Find and classify equilibria

What are the equilibria of your chosen dynamical system? 
Are these equilibria stable or unstable? 
Support your answer with either a stability argument based on either eigenvalues or Lyapunov functions.
Feel free to use symbolic manipulation or autograd tools (e.g. `sympy`).
Include this in your PR.

## Task 3: Investigate stochastic dynamics

Now modify your dynamics function to add process noise.
This can be as simple as adding a sample from a Gaussian random variable (e.g. $s_{t+1}=F(s_t)+w_t$),
but you may want to consider "realistic" sources of noise: e.g. due to minibatching in stochastic gradient descent.
Simulate trajectories from various initial conditions over many trials.
How does the behavior compare to the noiseless case?
Include a visually informative plot and a discussion in your PR.

## (pick one) Task 4: Repeat analysis with another example

Repeat your analysis (from above) with a different dynamical system: either an entirely different example, or just different values for the parameters. 
If you just change the parameters, do so in a way that leads to qualitatively different system behavior (e.g. number or stability of equilibria).

## (pick one) Task 5: Understanding nonlinear dynamics via lifting

Choose an example of a nonlinear dynamical system.
Select a kernel and use the kernel DMD method discussed in lecture. 
Assess both the training and prediction accuracy. 
Then investigate the modes and spectrum of the model, e.g. plot the first few modes.
Comment on what you observe.
